[Music]
Good day, I'm Norman wildberger today we're
going to begin establishing a good and proper
framework for geometry and we're going to do
that by doing the opposite of what the ancient
Greeks did we're going to build geometry on
top of arithmetic rather than the other way
around this is in the spirit of dear and FMA
and their contemporaries when introducing the
coordinate plane so I remind you we have types
of mathematical objects natural numbers fractions
integers and the rational numbers that we've
already established and we already know some
basic arithmetic with these domains so our basic
first definition is that of an integer point it
is just an ordered pair NM of integers and we
use a convention that we put this ordered pair
in square brackets in our mind the n and the
M are the coordinates in the X and in the y
direction of the point that we have in our minds
so this point here a for example is four over
and one up so it's represented by the ordered
pair 4 comma 1 however we don't just want to
have points which are on the intersections
of these lines we want to have also points
which are in between so for that we need a
more flexible notion of a rational point so
rational point for us is an ordered pair a of
rational numbers for example this point B here
which is about - 3 Hales over this way and 5/3
up is represented by the ordered pair - 3/2 5
over3 so although we are motivated by this picture
of a piece of graph paper the actual definitions
are inde dependent of these pictures and now we
have two new types of objects integer points which
we might represent by int squared and rational
points which we might represent by rat squared
or more pleasantly by the term point so a point
is a new type of mathematical object it's a pair
of rational numbers now that we have points let's
see about lines a line in the cartisian framework
is expressed by a linear equation between X and
Y so this line here for example which has various
points on it such as 1 1 3 0 5 -1 is represented
by this equation x + 2 y = 3 now that equation
can be Rewritten in a number of ways such as
these two ways but we prefer this standard form
where we have the X the Y and the constant all
on the left hand side in this way we can encode
this information by the three coefficients which
are only determined up to a scalar so it's the
proportion 1 to 2 to minus 3 which specifies this
line This is the motivation for our actual formal
definition the actual definition of a line doesn't
involve this picture at all officially of course
it's in the back of our minds so here is what a
line is it is an ordered proportion A to B to C
of rational numbers with the Proviso that A and
B are not both zero why do we need that well the
A and the B are the coefficients of the X and the
Y and if they are both zero then we would have an
equation like - 3al 0 which doesn't make any sense
so we need at least one of these coefficients to
be non zero note that we've enclosed the line
in pointed brackets that gives us a new type of
mathematical object which we call a line so now
we have points and we have lines defined purely
arithmetically we need to now connect these two
so let's change our notation just slightly we'll
say that a point a with coordinates X and Y
lies on the line L with coordinates A to B to
C precisely when this equation is satisfied when
a * x + B * y + C = 0 so this is connecting the
proportion of the line with the linear equation
that it represents alternatively we say that the
line L passes through the point a so for example
here is a point 6 over1 - 3 /2 and it lies on this
which is a line 1 to 2 to- 3 because 1 * this +
2 * this plus this equal zero so that point lies
on that line now when we start we don't just make
definitions we also need to establish some basic
facts which we call theorems so our first theorem
is the join of points theorem which tells us that
if we have two points A1 and A2 with it's X1 y1
and X2 Y2 if these points are distinct then there
is a unique line L which passes through both of
them and furthermore this line L which is called
the join of A1 A2 and written A1 A2 just like
multiplication that line is given explicitly by
the following formula in terms of the coordinates
of the two points y1 - Y2 is the first coefficient
X2 - X1 is the second one and then the combination
X1 Y2 - X2 y1 is the thir so that's the line that
passes through A1 A2 and the theorem saying that
that's the only one that does that let's have a
look at the proof first of all let's check that
both A1 and A2 lie on this line how do we do that
well the condition is that this coordinate * X1
plus this coordinate time y1 plus this third one
should equal zero that equation is true because if
you expand this using our laws of arithmetic the
left hand side collapses to get zero no matter
what these various variables are similarly if
you plug in X2 Y2 you get this equation which is
also identically equal zero that shows that this
particular combination is a line that lies both
on this point and on this point but we also need
to show that that's the only line that has that
property so suppose that A to B to C is another
line perhaps that passes through A1 A2 that means
that it passes through A1 gives us that equation
it passes through A2 gives us that equation if
we take this equation and subtract that equation
we get this relation a * X2 - X1 + B * Y2 - y1
= 0 that's telling us that the proportion A to
B is the proportion minus this to this so A to B
is y1 - Y2 to X2 - X1 and that's telling us that
our mystery line is actually instead of A and
B we can replace by these things here y1 - Y2
X2 - X1 and there's some other term let's call it
D so this line lies on both points and since we
can substitute the point X1 y1 there we get
an equation that we can solve for D when we
solve that equation for D we get that value there
telling us that our mystery line is in fact the
same one that we started with so there's actually
only one line that passes through two distinct
points now that we have what points and lines are
we can talk about some more basic facts talk about
par lines and perpendicular lines and about
triangles and so on so these important things
we'll do in the next video I hope you'll join
me for that I'm Norman wildberger and thanks for
listing